---
layout: faq
title: "Are there any statistics about how much sequence data has been generated by the project?"
faq_tags:
  - data-access
  - statistics
faq_related:
  - there-any-gene-expression-data-available-1000-genomes-project-samples
---
                    
The project presents statistics about how much data it has produced in several different ways. 

For raw data the [sequence.index](ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/README.sequence_data) file contains base and read counts for each of our active fastq files. We also provide summery statistics in our sequence_indices directory. There are four summary files, two exome and two low coverage. Both analysis groups have a .stats file which provides numbers of runs withdrawn for different reasons, base count and coverage stats for each study and population level summaries and a stats.csv file which provides a comparison to the previous index in terms of number of runs and bases etc. Since late 2012 we have also been producing analysis.sequence.index files which only consider illumina runs of 70bp read length or longer, these should also have statistics files

For the aligned data all our bam files have [bas files](http://www.1000genomes.org/faq/what-bas-file) associated with them.  These contain read group level statistics for the alignment. We also provide this in a collected form in the alignment_indices directory where all the individual mapped and unmapped bas files have been catted together. The [alignment indices](ftp://ftp.1000genomes.ebi.ac.uk/vol1/ftp/alignment_indices) directory also contains a .hsmetrics file which contains the results of the picard tool [CalculateHsMetrics](http://picard.sourceforge.net/command-line-overview.shtml#CalculateHsMetrics) for all the exome alignments and summary files which compare statistics between old and new alignment releases.
